one of the questions that rarely gets
asked sincerely but that's been put to
me many times in my life in in sincere
way which is to say a question that
people have asked me presuming that
there's no possible answer is the
question of why do we have philosophy at
all
why does philosophy exist why does
philosophy exist in European culture why
did it exist in say the culture of
ancient India of ancient China of
pre-modern Japan why does it exist today
given that most of us start from the
assumption now that we are basically a
bipedal mammal not so different from an
ape given the fact that we regard
ourselves as animals that are primarily
motivated by food sleep sex shelter such
simple things
why is philosophy here among us wise
have the cultural and historical
significance it does why does even have
the institutional significance that does
so on and so forth
as I say most people who ask this
question ask it in an instance ear way
as a type of approach they ask it in a
sense of demanding to know like how
anyone could possibly justify this with
the assumption that nobody could and the
people in my life who've asked me this
at different stages since I was a
teenager have normally been surprised
that I do have an answer and that my
answer is somewhat sincere and humble
and down to earth the first plank of my
answer is that I regard philosophy as a
problem-solving method or really
philosophy in the plural as you know
many problem-solving methods and even
collecting these problem-solving methods
together and engaging in a comparative
study of one about the one against the
other
but the fundamental point is if
something does not have value as a
problem-solving method I do not think it
belongs in the province of philosophy in
the category of philosophy and I'll come
back to that because that's one of the
main you know morals to this story here
is thinking about philosophy as
something very different from religion
thinking of philosophy is something very
different from from propaganda or even
you know ethical moralizing preaching
ethics is something very different from
philosophy of ethics analytical
philosophy of ethics there was a time in
ancient Greece when the concept of a
heliocentric solar system was proposed
now why why would anyone propose the
idea that the Sun was at the center of
the solar system when they had a
perfectly working model of the solar
system that had the earth of the center
and they had worked out all of the
equations reasonably well to calculate
the positions and distances and the
timing of the orbits of the planets and
purely everyone already had a system of
understanding the solar system that they
were quite satisfied with now I've never
done the math for ancient Greece this
way but I have done the math for ancient
India and in ancient India they had
shockingly accurate calculations related
to the orbit of the planets around the
solar system now I hesitate to even say
orbit I actually should hesitate me to
say planet because their concept of what
the planets were was simply what you can
see with the naked eye with no telescope
these were dots these were little
glowing dots that you could see in the
night sky that moved much more rapidly
than the other stars the other stars
were relatively still appeared
relatively unmoving and in India that
came up with these deadly accurate
shockingly accurate calculations and
equations so that you know if you knew
the position of any two of the planets
you knew the position of the other
planets so that you could record the
time and date of events on earth by
noting down the positions of the planets
on the azimuth and this kind of thing
they really really worked out these
equations to to a you know tremendously
fine point of accuracy I believe it is
down to fractions of a second some of
these equations and again I have seen
some of that stuff that continued being
used as a
kolender whole system as a method of
recording the the time and date of
significant events even into basically
early modern Myanmar in in Southeast
Asia that tradition from India carried
on so I studied as part of the history
of tera vaada but is important history
of Southeast Asia part of the history of
sri lanka - obviously so if everyone has
a working system for understanding what
the planets are and how they move in
their orbits why why would a philosopher
challenge this with the idea that the
Sun and not the earth ought to be in the
center of the solar system and
empirically everyone seems satisfied
that they can vindicate the system they
already have say look the equations make
sense you know the calculations work
that we have and the calculations are in
a sense empirical they are validated but
what you can observe with the naked eye
with the the motion of the planets from
from it or from a terrestrial
perspective for lack of a better term
there has to be a sincere engagement
with the question of what is the solar
system from a problem solving method
there's an onus on you to show look
these equations they have predictive
power they have accuracy they're
empirically valid but they create some
set of problems that are insoluble with
the assumption that the earth is in the
center of the solar system and that
those problems are then resolved they're
solved if instead we try to make the
math work with the assumption that it's
the Sun that's in the center of the
solar system so you guys probably know
this in ancient Greece in ancient Athens
we have the record that this ideal was
proposed it was debated and it was
ultimately discarded the idea the
heliocentric universe really didn't get
vindicated until many many centuries
later with Copernicus and even then as
you may have heard it was a bit of a
struggle people did not want to accept
this idea that the Sun was at the center
of the solar system in ancient India I
don't know if they really thought it
through as a model of the solar system
nothing I've read really indicates that
their cause cosmology of what the
planets were supposed to be is really
another question but as I said they had
these working these working
equations so this shows both the
weakness and the strength of philosophy
in ancient Athens they approach the
question of the cosmology of what is the
universe the cosmology of the world well
you know well how would did the world
arise I was created from a philosophical
perspective from what they thought they
ought to be the significance of elements
like fire and water and whether or not
fire ought to be in the center of the
solar system and so on but the validity
of the idea that the Sun is in the
center of the solar system it has to be
proposed and has to be proven as a
problem-solving method if you can't show
that there is a problem with the
existing model and that this new idea
solves the problem then we're not really
talking about philosophy we're really
just debating something much more like a
religious ideal like does it make more
sense as a myth or a fable for us to
imagine the Sun being at the center of
the solar system or for us to imagine an
orb a sphere that's mostly water being
in the center solar system like planet
Earth if it's just about symbolic values
and mythological values and not even a
problem solving method then with you
know even with something that's as
empirically obvious is that where the
solar system works it still comes back
to this this question and another subtle
but pervasive question that comes out of
ancient Athens when Aristotle asks what
is the best system of government is he
sincerely questioning is he actually
proposing this as a problem and a
problem to be solved is he actually
investigating what is the best way for
human beings to organize government or
is he just engaging in propaganda to
promote the government that happens to
be the government of Athens now in my
own opinion I don't think it's just
propaganda I think the reason why
Aristotle's writing about politics has
endured and still has value today was
that he was really sincerely interested
in in solving problems that he was in
conducting an inquiry into how human
beings short- government and by contrast
just if
few centuries later you have an author
like Cicero in Rome in Cicero asked
exactly the same question he asks what
is the best form of government but it is
completely obvious that when Cicero asks
and answers this question it is 100%
insincere propaganda for the glory of
ancient Rome
all that Cicero is interested in telling
you is that the government of the Roman
Empire sorry at that time not
technically the Empire in terms of how
we use the term today but only the
government of Rome was the best possible
system of government even though it was
just a product of random historical
circumstances that they had ended up
with a better system of government than
any of the other systems of government
whether in Greece or North Africa
Carthage whatever comparison you wanted
to make and frankly that in sincerity
takes Cicero's work out of the category
of philosophy and puts it into the
category of propaganda
even though ostensibly and at a surface
level it is asking and engaging with
exactly the same problems that Aristotle
asked in his politics and indeed one
treatise is modelled on the other so
again my sense is that the validity of
something as philosophy stands or Falls
with it being a problem-solving method
and this answers the question of why we
as hairless bipedal Apes why we created
why we have culturally this thing called
philosophy at some point you know within
the province of propaganda propaganda
has to stop we have to ask these
questions sincerely and very often
that's what we passed from politics into
political philosophy at some point these
religious questions have to stop just
being cheerleading for one religious
view or another we have to ask them
sincerely and that's when we get into
religious philosophy and of course it's
really a very stark line in ethics
should we I mean if you're just talking
to a child you may just tell that child
what they ought to do you may just tell
the child what everyone in society ought
to do to make society a better place but
if you're going to talk about ethics in
a sincere way in terms of
problem-solving once you get into
ethical philosophy then you're asking
questions that you
genuinely not know the answer to you're
engaging in inquiry and you're looking
at the methods the problem-solving
methods that bring us to those different
conclusions and ultimately the validity
of a system of ethics and philosophy is
not whether or not result it convinces
people to be moral as of course you can
just go around still in the in a
mainstream religion like Islam they just
tell people to do things that they
consider morally good because if they
don't they'll go to hell after they die
so obviously if it's just a vote um
inculcating a habit of mind into people
that's gonna produce socially desirable
consequences any kind of lie any kind of
insincere beliefs
tenets or philosophy could could stand
but precisely when we move from religion
and propaganda into the province of real
philosophy that has to be one more when
we're questioning something that I think
in an important sense is different from
questioning what is the truth we're
questioning what is the problem how do
we solve the problem and then what is
the validity or invalidity of these
problem-solving methods so guys that's
what I have to say in this video the
context from our recording this video
today is that I just made last night at
2:30 a.m. when I couldn't fall asleep I
made a relatively brief video of talking
about the philosophy of determinism and
I didn't say clearly in that video I had
it in the the caption the written text
below the video I said look why do I
call determinism a pseudo philosophy I
call determinism a pseudo philosophy
because I do not see it as sincerely
trying to solve a problem I don't see it
as having problem solving value I see it
more as a kind of myth of religious
mythology and the main defense I hear
again and again from the terminus is no
no no the fact that they believe that a
criminal doesn't have any choice before
committing a crime that doesn't matter
that doesn't change anything the
description of the world is just the
same no no the fact that I can't control
you know the dilation of the pupil of my
eye or as I can can
roll things I consciously do no no that
distinction doesn't matter that's just
subjective that's just line you perceive
nevertheless this this remains true well
what is the problem that this solves
because you've presented a theory that
to a much greater extent than the
heliocentric solar system to a much
greater extent than the idea that the
Sun is at the center of the solar system
the people who believe in determinists
have proposed a theory that contradicts
something empirically obvious to all of
us
what's empirically obvious is that we
make choices that we make decisions that
we think about the future that we
imagine the future and that when we're
engaged in imagining what we might do
about the future we are doing something
with our mind that is much different
from the way the mind controls the
dilation of the pupil which is to say I
don't consciously control it there's a
cause-and-effect relationship if I turn
off this light my pupil will dilate one
way if I make the light brighter my
people will doubt the other way and I
have no way to control that no way to do
it I have no choice in the matter
that's an involuntary reaction in a
cause-and-effect way they're claiming
that everything we do with their bodies
in our minds is in this sense determined
in a cause-and-effect way well what is
the problem that you're sincerely trying
to solve ultimately the heliocentric
model of the solar system had to win the
math could work either way you actually
could come up with equations that
accurately predicted the timing of the
motions of all the planets without
understanding that the Sun was a solar
system you could make the math work but
the heliocentric model of the universe
from a sincere problem-solving point of
view and you think about Occam's razor
and so on it's a simpler and more
coherent account of why and how those
equations work out it explains a lot of
things like what one of the real ones
the ancient world struggled with is what
is an eclipse a solar eclipse and a
lunar eclipse those get really hard to
explain if you don't believe in a
heliocentric solar system there's some
things like this that really raise
troublesome questions even when you were
just making observations without a
telescope with with the naked eye and
when people were not necessarily
imagining that these glowing dots in the
sky were actually planets similar to
Planet Earth they probably were not even
imagining the earth as a sphere kind of
a long story about ancient cosmology and
what their assumptions were so real
philosophy is ultimately I think not
even a search for truth it's not
ultimately about epistemology or
metaphysics but the type of sincerity
that philosophy requires is the attitude
of solving problems and you can see you
cross a dotted line because if you sit
down in the real world of politics you
may have some particular biased outcome
you're trying to achieve you may be
trying to make the world a better place
you may be trying to avert a war you may
be trying to avert starvation and in
order to achieve those goals you may
involve yourself in any number of lies
deceptions skullduggery you may not be
interested in the truth you may not be
interested in philosophy and indeed I
think some of the worst catastrophes in
human history have happened for that
reason because people had what they
thought were good intentions and in many
ways did indeed pave the way to hell as
the old as the old saying goes that the
road to hell is paved with good
intentions
and philosophy remains this category
that stands outside of the other
disciplines precisely because of the
attention paid to the discipline itself
the function of the problem-solving
method and the comparative analysis of
those problem-solving methods